once around white dwarfs these tiny but
very very hot and very interesting
little
stars and the first discovery of a white
dwarf star was by that man Sir William
hersel back in 1783 on the 31st of
January he was observing the star 40
eridani and he noticed that there was a
small faint companion next to it 4
eridani B now we now know that it's part
of a triple star system and uh I've got
a whole video called once around 40
eridani if you want to go and check out
all about that and the planets around it
40 eridani very interesting uh it turns
up in a couple of different science
fiction books and uh uh it was the
supposed home in starre of the planet
Vulcan and Mr Spock so uh an interesting
little system
the second example I have for you is Van
Manon star this was the first white
dwarf star to be found as a solitary
star on its own um it was tracked down
by Adrien van Manon in 1917 he noticed
while observing another nearby star
that uh van Manon Star seem to be moving
very rapidly year on year with a high
proper motion and that's always a sign
that the star is quite quite nearby and
so uh other people Then followed up and
worked out from Parallax that it was 14
light years
away now the second white dwarf to be
discovered and our third example here
was another companion star and this is
Sirius B in 1862 Alvin Clark at the
Dearborn observatory in Chicago was
testing the brand new 18 1/2 in
refractor the largest scope in the world
and he spotted a faint companion next to
sirius at magnitude
8.4 now he wasn't sure if it was a True
Companion or just a line of sight thing
because it was so faint um it just might
just be luckily lined
up but that white color also indicates a
a very high temperature basically a
white hot star and a white hot star
would normally be a very bright star and
therefore if it was dim then probably it
wasn't a companion of Sirus it was much
further away and there was also
something weird about the Spectrum which
we you'll see in a
minute but 20 years earlier and quite
widely known at the time was the fact
that Fredick Bessel in 1844 had been
studying the motion of Sirius across the
sky and he noted that
he thought he had observed a 50-year
wobble in the trajectory that Sirius was
taking against the background of stars
and postulated that there was an unseen
companion uh possibly a large planet or
something pulling on Sirius in a in a
50-year long orbit um now that's an
interesting case because actually if you
know the orbits of uh two objects then
Kepler's laws can tell you their masses
so indeed he was right there are a pair
of
stars um as Alvin Clark discovered in
this 50-year orbit and from the Kepler's
Third Law you can calculate the masses
you get 2.1 for the bright star and just
under one
0.98 for the small faint Companion now
that's tricky because now that we know
that they really are in orbit round each
other you have this very hot white hot
but dim star with a strange
spectrum
that seems to have the mass of the Sun
and an ordinary star with the mass of
the Sun would be much brighter it' be
about 500 times brighter than uh than
the level that uh was observed so the
only way that can be in physics if you
have a high temperature object it will
glow and give off light so if we see it
being white hot it should be very bright
unless it is Tiny if the surface area of
the object is much much smaller then uh
that can account for the
dimness but these numbers just didn't
seem to stack up because what it implied
was that you had a star that was white
hot and the size of the Earth but the
mass of the Sun and in fact you can do a
little bit of maths with that the sun is
100 time 100 * 100 in volume it's 100
time the radius so 100 cubed is a
million times the volume but it's a
little bit less dense it's mostly made
of hydrogen and helium so the density
works out that it's
333,000 times the mass now the density
of the earth is 5 a half grams for every
cubic centimeter so you multiply those
two together and you find that the
density of Sirius B must be uh just
under 2 million grams per cubic
centimeter so a sugar cube would weigh
two tons that's quite astonishing but it
explains the spectrum because for such a
dense object the surface gravity would
be enormous and you can calculate thatth
things would have have to lose a lot of
energy in getting away climbing out of
the gravity well and that includes light
light would lose energy escaping from
the surface and it would shift the light
from the high energy blue end to the low
energy red end of the
spectrum and that's precisely what was
being seen in the spectrum of Sirius B
the dark absorption lines in the
spectrum of the light where different
elements are taking a bite out of the
different colors at very specific
wavelengths were all being shifted to
the red End by an amount an equal amount
corresponding to this loss of GRA
gravitational energy as the light climbs
away from this deep gravity
well now that's actually turns out to be
very useful because now we have another
way of working out the mass of a white
dwarf star we don't have to do it from
observing the orbit around in a binary
pair and so for a solitary star like van
Manon star you can look at the
gravitational red shift in the Spectrum
and infer the mass you have to be a
little careful just in case the star is
moving rapidly towards you or away from
you which may also cause uh a red shift
but generally a smaller
one now if you're interested I've got
another video that talks all about
Sirius and Sirius B but let's move
on to the main topic here which is
what's going on why don't white dwarf
stars just collapse they are the end
stage of sunlike stars that have come to
the point where they've run out of fuel
they've exhausted their ability to carry
out nuclear fusion in the core and the
consequence of that is that the outer
layers were burned through uh converting
hydrogen to helium in a shell that
eventually drives away all of the outer
layers in what's called a planetary
nebula so the star swelled up to a red
giant and then puffed off its outer
layers leaving just the dead nuclear
core behind as this collapsed dense
white dwarf and they're super hot
because they were the core of a star but
they're not releasing any more nuclear
energy they're not carrying out Fusion
it's just the residual heat that is
being dissipated and they will cool
eventually over billions of years to uh
fade away and become black
dwarfs but normally in a star it is the
release of nuclear energy in the core
that stops them collapsing and that uh
enables them to resist the pressure of
gravity so what's going on here why
don't these Stars collapse well it's all
down to electrons in boxes electrons are
antisocial beasts they're called fermion
they have half integer spin if you want
to be technical about it and you can't
put uh two electrons with the same
Quantum State the same conditions in the
same piece of space you have to spread
them
out you can either spread them out
physically in space or you can spread
out their energy condition um and
keep them apart that way so what I've
got here is uh some electrons in the
bottom row the lowest energy state of my
star and space is going acrossways
across the
bottom and if I squeeze with gravity and
reduce the amount of space that's
available then I have to stack the
electrons up into higher and higher
energy levels to keep them apart this is
the poorly exclusion principle of
quantum mechanics that work
and the result of this is that you need
to consume energy to push them further
and further into these higher energy
states higher energy means more kinetic
energy means more velocity they're
moving around faster their energy is
essentially a half mv^ squ so the mass
stays the same but as you increase the
energy the velocity goes up and so in
any given instant of time they will move
over a wider volume due to that higher
speed and so they actually the more you
push them to higher energies the more
space they tend to take up and so this
becomes a problem um and the result is a
back pressure pushing back out resisting
the collapse if you if gravity tried to
gain energy by squeezing it would have
to force the electrons into even higher
energy states and so you end up in
balance between those two opposing uh
Tendencies and that's really what causes
this new equilibrium and the star to uh
come to a particular size and not just
carry on collapsing down into a black
hole now many stars are born in binary
systems and the Sun is quite unusual in
being on its own
and if you had a pair of sunlight stars
born many billions of years ago then you
could be in the situation where the more
massive of the partners evolve to become
a red giant and then collapse to a white
dwarf and then playing catchup the
Lesser partner will eventually swell up
at the end of its life cycle and become
a red giant as well and when that
happens if the two are orbiting close to
each other then the the Red Giant star
doesn't have a very strong grip on its
outer atmosphere its envelope but the
powerful gravity of the white dwarf next
door can actually start to rip material
away and drag a bridge of gas across
from the outer layers of the Red Dwarf
to spiral onto the white dwarf star
gradually increasing its
mass but there's a limit to what can be
tolerated
if you exceed 1.44 solar masses then the
star blows up as a type 1A Supernova
this is called the chandraa limit after
this chap here and chandraa was on a
boat coming from India to study in
Cambridge when he worked out all of the
mathematics using Einstein's
formula um for the energy states of
those electrons in the uh white dwarf
star
the problem is that as you try to force
them into higher and higher energy
states you eventually run into the
problem that uh they can't move faster
than the speed of light and so there's
an upper Bound for how much energy you
can push into them and therefore an
upper Bound for the amount of gravity
that can be resisted by this electron
back
pressure and so if you put just one more
teaspoonful of mass onto the star the
electrons cannot prevent the further
collapse electron pressure is exceeded
and the star starts collapsing down and
when it does so of course uh that this
is a very violent process it triggers
off uh an enormous explosion and uh the
material is completely
destroyed and so your type 1 a supernova
can be one of the most powerful uh types
of Stellar explosion
here's an example of one the bright
object at the bottom left that is a type
1 a supernova exploding in the outer
reaches of its parent Galaxy and it's
putting out about the same amount of
light when it does so as all the other
stars put
together but because these things always
detonate at 1.44 solar masses the idea
is that they are very much usable as a
standard candle if you have a known
power source
and you move it twice as far away it
will look a quarter as bright three
times as far away it'll look a 9th as
bright and so if you know that this
thing is a standard power you can look
at how bright it appears and calculate
the distance and so type 1 a supern noi
can be used as these standard candles if
you see one blow up in a distant Galaxy
and you look to see how bright it
appears from Earth then you can work out
how far away it must have been and this
makes an excellent way of measuring the
distances to very distant galaxies
because these things can be seen at
those great distances because they're so
bright and you can recognize that they
are a type 1A Supernova because they
have these clearly
identifiable light curves with a very
standard shape that allows you to uh
work out exactly uh that this was a 1A
Supernova and how bright it
was and it was by doing this work that
the Nobel Prize was awarded for
discovery of dark energy uh the dark
energy is the subject of another one of
my talks but it is the outward
anti-gravity pressure that is driving
the acceleration of the expansion of
space and was discovered because of
the use of these type 1A supern noi that
were able to be spotted in distant
galaxies and give us a very good way of
estimating the expansion
history of the universe how fast it had
been expanding at different times and
the shocking result was that it seem to
be getting faster in the modern Universe
rather than slowing down but if if
you're interested there is another story
all about
that and that's all well and good but
then we discovered a number of rather
interesting super noi there's the light
curve here from SN 2009
DC where it's plotted and it was really
not a very good fit to the light curve
of standard super noi um and it it
seemed that there was something strange
about this one it seemed there was a
certain amount of nickel present and
some iron in the Spectrum and that's not
quite right we don't usually see that in
uh in these things uh in the same way as
if they had a a very large nickel iron
core that's more characteristic of a
type to so there was something very
weird going on but the fundamental
problem is it was too bright it's called
a super chandraa
event the first one of these was spotted
in 2003 and was called the champagne
super over because it seemed to break
the
limit and possibly there are
explanations for that relating to just
how fast it was rotating and other
factors but a number of them has been
seen this this one here that we have the
Oddball report
for uh 2006 gz 2007 if these were also
super chandraa events and they seem to
be as um powerful as if they were up to
2 2.4 even up to 2.8 solar masses of
material
detonating well that's roughly double
the chandraa limit and it suggests that
it was the result of a pair of binary
Stars colliding so that probably
explains
things to white dwarfs forming in a
system and spiraling into each other
would detonate they would ly exceed the
Chandra sea limit and by up to a factor
of two um so this all looks like it's
been explained but it does mean you have
to be a little bit careful looking at
the Spectra of um and the light curves
of type 1 a supern noi and using them as
standard
candles and there's one other rather
curious feature and that is that in this
standard idea of the accretion binary
model where one star is eating its uh
its companion uh through an accretion
disc from a a red dwarf as we've already
looked at the material that was
spiraling into the acution disc would
get heated up to high temperature and
emit a lot of x-rays in the
process and so if you have a rough idea
of to how many of these events are going
on in a large Galaxy you could would add
up the total amount of
X-rays and studies of elliptical
galaxies looking at the X-ray emissions
find there is only enough to account for
5% of the type 1A supern
noi so implies that 95% of the supern
noi are actually results of some other
process and they probably collisions and
there could be many many of them that
are in fact super chandraa events so it
could mean that uh we've been getting
this wrong and that they use to standard
candles needs to be looked at
again and so I'll wrap up there thank
you very much for listening I hope you
enjoyed that do go and check out a
couple of the other videos if you've
like this one there's one called Quark
stars and Strange Matter that's uh had a
lot of views and is very popular so uh
you probably love that one thanks a lot
bye now